Preface- I'm writing this preface after composing my answers.  I just want to confess before my comments that I know of my limited perspective and my limited knowledge of much of these issues.  I was trying to be as open and inclusive with my answers as I could, and to try and not say anything I believed to be offensive (while also avoiding saying something that I thought was wrong). I want to stress that I do not want anyone to feel slighted by anything, and while I thought what I have written would not be considered as a slight towards another, I know that I only have my own privileged, limited perspective, so I could be wrong.  Please let me know if there is something here that should be pointed out or corrected, and I would appreciate the learning opportunity.

ANSWERS:

1.1 In the example scenarios posited by the researchers, do you feel that either the bosses or subordinates acted out of ill-will? Who do you feel was most at fault? If it's difficult for you to choose, why?

It's definitely a difficult choice.  Both have make some mistakes.  But if I were to say that one is most at fault, in this case, I'm probably going to say that the bosses have done a slightly worse job.  I mean, while I think that the subordinates' actions, both in response to the initial corrective actions levied by their boss was inappropriate, the whole issue comes down in the end to the boss/manager not being able to work past an initial poor interaction or performance.  Employees make mistakes, and often the boss is doing the correct thing in addressing these mistakes.  But, in most cases, especially when the employee's reaction has not been drastic or poor, a manager or boss should be able to move past it and treat that employee in such a way that looks past previous mistakes.  For instance, in the "Set-Up-To-Fail Syndrome" diagram, in panels 3-7, the poor interactions that get increasingly toxic between the boss and employee are a result of the boss' inability to move beyond a bad incident.  Just think of it this way- no employee with be perfect.  They will make mistakes.  And they can be corrected on these mistakes by a boss.  And some employees will have poor reactions to this corrective behavior on the part of their boss.  I know I've reacted poorly to discipline before in the workplace.  I've gotten mad, or given attitude.  If my boss had just taken that reaction with increasing critical behavior, wow, I can only imagine how quickly things would go downhill.  I think that persons in charge have to have the ability to be objective as possible, to take into account a wide variety of factors when evaluating employee performance.  If a manager can't take into account the reality that human behavior is imperfect, and people can react poorly, and move on from incidents without giving that employee another chance to show that they can succeed, how would any employee succeed in such an environment.  

Funnily or sadly enough, though, I feel like as a manager or boss, even I would probably fall into a pattern like this from time to time.  I think of my role as instructor-- I know that when students would turn in poor work, my expectations for future work would be lowered, even though I'd want to believe that I would be fair and balanced in my grading and appraisal of students.  I mean, it's so hard to look beyond bad events and try and take a fair and balanced approach to student work.  I feel like this set-up-to-fail syndrome is probably a pervasive issue.  I know there are people out there in positions of leadership that wouldn't fall into this pattern, but I'm sure that there are many more leaders out there that end up managing with this sort of leadership style.  It just seems like a trap that's hard to avoid.  It actually makes me depressed a bit!  I see it as such a natural consequence, given how hard it is to be a model leader and act without fault, I just don't know how we as a society would be able to remove this tendency from our normal modes of action. 


2.a Did any of these numbers surprise you? What do you think contributes to the disparity between these demographics' overall workforce share and share of the tech workforce?

So, I think that one thing that I had as an initial reaction to the first data regarding diversity in tech (just with these tech companies, and not just their tech leadership) is that I want to know more about the division of the workforce and how that would break down by race/ethnicity/gender.  For instance, while Amazon is definitely a tech company, there is a large part of their workforce that I would consider non-technical.  They have warehouses devoted to filling orders, with thousands of employees.  How would the chart look if it was more specific on the breakdown?  Would there be a more telling difference between the types of jobs that people hold based on r/e/g if we were to look at skilled and unskilled labor?  So, who exactly is filling in at corporate (or just those so-called "white collar") jobs and who is out there on the floor earning hourly while stuffing, labeling, and shipping boxes?  Those latter jobs are much more difficult, and I'd say, less indicative of a "tech job".  Just check out this account of a warehouse job: http://www.businessinsider.com/i-spent-a-week-working-at-an-amazon-warehouse-and-it-is-hard-physical-work-2013-12 and see the author's opinion.  It is hardly a job that someone wishing to get in at a tech company would look for.  But if this is included in the survey from the reading, is it really useful when we are looking into diversity at tech companies?  This account of a "fulfillment center" position is even worse: http://highline.huffingtonpost.com/articles/en/life-and-death-amazon-temp/ .  Who'd think this is what we are wishing to represent a tech job?  So, the fact that Amazon is above average, and far and above other companies when employing black workers, might be more interesting if we knew what jobs were included in the survey, and if warehouse positions were included.  My guess is, with 77 thousand jobs listed, it probably does include such positions.  Given the historical and still prevalent issues regarding the extra hurdles for minorities and non-male genders in getting those "white collar" jobs, I bet that if we had that split, Amazon's numbers wouldn't look so good.

Secondly, I also think that, while the industries general feeling that they are happy with progress, well, I don't think I'd be very happy if I had numbers that still reflected a lack of diversity and a disparity between what the workforce percentages are compared to their workforce numbers.  I mean, I don't think I should foist upon these tech companies all of the blame for the diversity hurdles present in society.  But they aren't exactly much better, and still represent problems in diversity.  I definitely wouldn't present my tech company (if I had one), in a way that would suggest that I'm proud of my progress.  Be proud when you actually achieve meaningful diversity, and not just that you're making progress.  And heck, some of it really could be considered token actions toward progress.  C'mon, Facebook and Google, you look terrible.

2.b.1 Are all groups represented in management the way they are in the general tech workforce? Who is under-represented? Over-represented?

Well, I don't think there is just about any group that is overrepresented, except white males.  I mean, if you filter by "female" and just about any race other than white, there are some columns on the table at 0%.  That's just ridiculously terrible.  Even just being female means you are underrepresented.  Facebook had the highest percentage at 23%, but obviously that's half of what it should be, were things equal.  But if you aren't white, it just makes it even harder or less likely to make it into a tech leadership position.  I know that there are a lot of things that can explain this, and not all are at the fault of these companies.  There is a long history of sexism and racism, and even if we could argue (we can't, but just for the sake of argument) that new hires in the tech industry didn't have any diversity hurdles, and somehow new hires accurately reflected the percentages of society.  It would take years for them to reach chances of getting top tech jobs, the higher jobs of this chart.  So, certainly we can explain why the numbers are so bad right now.  Of course, cmon, it's not even close to true that hurdles for those not white or male are disappearing.  They are perhaps fewer, with overt attempts by these companies to rectify their poor diversity.  But even still, these hurdles still exist.  And as such, the numbers for higher jobs in tech will still be poor, and it'll be a long time before they even start looking like the percentages found in the above chart, representing tech jobs in general.   I'm sure the people touting the success of their company's diversity efforts would probably want to shy away from explaining these charts.

2.b.2 Think back to previous jobs you've had or jobs you've aspired to have. Did you see people you identified with as leaders in those professions? Was that important to you? Why or why not?

This is a bit strange, as until recently I was looking into a job teaching philosophy.  And, despite the academic field being in the liberal arts, it may or may not surprise you that philosophy also has major issues with diversity.  White males were disproportionally represented in the better jobs in philosophy as well.  Now, there were a ton of philosophers I identified with and thought of as aspirational people.  I loved most of my professors, and thought that they were overall great people.  But even among my own school's faculty, I did see evidence of bias and discrimination, even in small, perhaps unconscious levels.  I know from talking to other philosophers, especially women philosophers, that there were definitely issues and experiences that would be called sexist.  There was harassment, and other things related to the identify of these people unrelated to their philosophical beliefs.  Philosophy as an practice has had in recent years a ton of vocal efforts to deal with these issues.  There is a blog that details incidents related to gender- https://beingawomaninphilosophy.wordpress.com/   This blog is full of horror stories from women philosophers.  I've spent a lot of time there, at times moved to tears about what some of these philosophers went through.  It's not all bad, of course, but my god, you would think philosophers, who often have to discuss and think critically about ethical issues (it's inevitable, even if you don't work in ethics), would do better to be mindful and thoughtful for how their actions and decisions might discriminate or hurt others.  But we saw in recent years many famous incidents: Colin McGinn's harassment of his graduate student, the horrible sexism going down at UC Boulder, Thomas Pogge's targeting of women students, I could go on and on.  There are many famous incidents that made waves in the discipline.  Yet discrimination is still a rampant issue.  I think that we could count on our fingers the number of black women philosophers in tenure track jobs (I don't know the exact number, but I seriously suspect it could be in the single digits!).  It's just a sad fact, and another thing that made me reassess my future in academic philosophy.

That being said, well, some of my heroes are philosophers.  My own advisers, Jenefer Robinson and Daniel Nathan, were just great Aestheticians.  They'd produced some great scholarship that I would read and just be amazed at their brilliance.  I had other professors, like Vanessa Carbonell and Chris Hom, that were amazing instructors and just great people to turn to for advice and an open ear.  I also met great philosophers at conferences, top names whose books I'd read and interacted with philosophically in papers and in class.  It was just astonishing how hard these people worked, and how devoted they were to their craft.  It was inspiring.

I think that is the takeaway from this- was it important that I met these people?  Yes, because they inspired me.  They were leaders, not only in official senses like department leaders, advisers, or on my committee.  They were leaders because they cared about helping others, both in their scholarship but also in how they wanted to help guide students through the discipline and in life, doling out advice and wisdom on how best one might be able to use their knowledge and skills to succeed in and out of the ivory tower. 


3.1 Baker's essay focuses on the personal impact on being one of the few under-represented folks in tech who get through to the other end of the job pipeline. What was something that you found remarkable about her on-the-job experience?

I don't want to say that I was completely unsurprised by her account, but really, it was what I expected.  I thought there would be no way an article from a PoC woman would be full of positive things to say about her experience in these tech jobs.  Actually, if had been the opposite, I would have been angry.  I just know, or have a very strong opinion, that her account is very typical for people that don't meet that homogenous mold that dominates the tech industry (and heck, probably just about every industry out there).  The power structure that favors white and male employees is just a pervasive problem, so her account is not surprising.  

That said, it is still a remarkable essay.  I do like how she is willing to speak out about her own issues, and address the personal toll both physically and career-wise, her experiences have dished out on her.  So many people suffer silently, or who choose to "present", to borrow the term she employs, as a coping mechanism or survival mechanism.  I think that she is taking a great risk in speaking out loud about how negative some of the things she has endured are, and how her industry has done so much to hurt her.  That's the remarkable thing.  It's so much easier to just suffer silently, or to just internalize it as the norm, something that can't be changed.  Something that has to just be shouldered without complaint, as the alternative means the end of a fruitful career or a walling off of that person from being able to succeed.  Like her other employee that did speak out and was ostrasized, there is so much at risk.  And, even knowing that, she knows that in order to try and improve things (I stress try here, as the sad reality is that people in power do not wish do take actions that hurt their power or status).

Sometimes I really start to hate my skin and gender, knowing the great wrongs perpetrated, both historically and currently, but people that look like me.  I know that being white and male confers to me great advantage, and I sometimes feel such guilt for being able to take advantage of this (by choice or innately because of the way our world is structured).  It's not that I wish I were another person, a different gender or different background or color of skin.  It's not like that.  I did not choose to be born here and now to the world that I inhabit.  I just wish that these things meant nothing- being white or being male.  I hate that these things mean "good" to society (as decided by the historical power structures ruled by white men).  It should be meaningless, or at least confer no status, no "good" or "bad".  Maybe saying that it should be meaningless is incorrect, I don't know how to really put it better.  Race and gender are meaningful, but there is so much meaning inputed into "white" and "male" that confers advantage and privilege.  I just wish we could wipe out those meanings from "white" and "male".  I am not trying to imply that we should cease to look at people in terms of race and gender.  The idea that we should move beyond the need to talk about race and gender is a foolish and wrong one.  Gender and race is important, especially because of history.  I get Colbert's joke, the idea that "He doesn't see race".  It's usually a white male that would espouse such an ignorant statement, and I know that he jokes this way to point out the fallacy of this position (It's probably not Colbert's joke but it's easier to name it as such here, anyway!).  We should never forget or move beyond race and gender, for that would also be to try to move on from the historical evils wrought upon those of different races and genders.  This shouldn't be forgotten, not only because it would be to risk repeating these behaviors, but also because currently and for the forseeable future, these sins still greatly affect many people.  America's history of racism, for instance, is still ongoing.  For instance, just look at the value of the average estate of a white family vs. that of a black family: http://www.forbes.com/sites/laurashin/2015/03/26/the-racial-wealth-gap-why-a-typical-white-household-has-16-times-the-wealth-of-a-black-one/ .  So much of our history goes into this current reality.  We are so far from being anywhere close to moving beyond wrongs committed on minorities.  I probably shouldn't go on and on here.  I know that my own language doesn't really get it right, and I know that I don't have the position to accurately speak to the experience of someone that isn't white or male.  I don't want to speak for the experience of others.  But I just want to acknowledge that I'm trying to see and understand the problem.  

3.2 How much should a new employee be expected to change to fit the mold of the industry or company they are entering?

I really don't know of a good answer here.  I think it depends on the mold of the company.  So, certain molds should probably be aspired to reach-- like the notion that if one enters a company that thrives on good team interaction-- you should probably try to be a team player.  If a company is an open place where people aren't afraid to speak about their experiences and their differences, a positive environment, a person should try to fit that mold and also work towards enriching that positive environment.  Those are molds, certainly.  And there are many more like those molds where I can imagine saying according to that type would be a good thing.

But most molds?  I really probably wouldn't say one should ever try to meet those.  Anything that Ms. Baker experienced, anything that would be considered a company mold of the type she saw (perhaps with some exceptions for some of what she experienced in Atlanta) is just right out, to be abandoned.  Any mold that looks at a person's diversity and judges it in any negative sense, should be abandoned. No one should ever try be forced into integrating with these toxic cultures.  No one should have to feel like they have to "present" in a way that makes them feel uncomfortable in their skin or appearance.  I mean, even in saying this I also want to acknowledge that some people are going to be forced to integrate into such negative roles.  Given that I have a negative appraisal of the future of achieving diversity in many industries, I want to stress that I would never fault someone that was in a poor position to refuse to take a job.  Given how hard it seems for a person who isn't white or male to succeed in a tech leadership position, how could I judge someone for wanting to fit into a negative mold if it were there only chance at a tech leadership job?  So, while I think we shouldn't ever want to expect someone to try to fit these molds, we can't fault someone (someone like Baker or otherwise) from living in awful molds in order to survive.  


4.1 Do you think blind-hiring is a sufficient solution to addressing industry biases?
To see if you can you see even a small part of both sides, also describe some of the arguments against your answer.

This is complicated, and I think that I support some blind hiring, but not blind hiring in cases.  They partially addressed the issue that blind hiring has, and some steps taken to avoid these issues.  I want to speak to that a bit.  The notion of looking at SAT scores was really problematic to me, as was looking at one's academic pedigree.  As stated in the article, standardized tests are still biased towards a certain type (read white and male, right?) and also addressed, our most selective higher institutions are still discriminating.  So, really, if blind hiring was still looking at scores and resumes, which might be able to avoid overt racial and gender biases, those biases still were in effect when that person was building their resume.  If it's harder to get in to a top school if you aren't white or male, that would mean a less good resume and thus a hurdle would be put in place even by a blind hire system.  Unless this "blind" system was in place from womb to tomb, in other words, that there would be no bias for people in society in all aspects, no blind hiring system would be able to avoid discrimination, for even if they were trying to avoid discrimination, that applicant still suffers from being discriminated against, even before they were being appraised by the hiring committee.  I was pleased when the article said that there were steps being taken to move away from using standardized tests and academic pedigree.  But it's still something that is an issue.  How can one even evaluate potential employees without seeing their resume, their experience?  And as such, the hiring process inevitably still incorporates into it biases.  So, in this case, there is still not a true "blind hire system" in place.  

Now, I am going to say I'm definitely in favor of a blind hire system being instituted in many cases.  I would not want to argue against the success of the blind hire practice of the Boston Symphony Orchestra.  It brought in more women to the orchestra, and that's a positive thing.  And I'm sure that having a blind hire system would definitely be a positive step towards greater diversity.  It should be practiced, but this is the thing-- blind hiring should not be the end of a company's steps towards reaching diversity.

I'm not going to even try to argue that companies should work towards ending bias in society overall.  There is no way that argument would ever go over with a company- they are interested in their bottom lines after all, right?  So I wouldn't want to try to argue for this, even if it would be the right thing to do, or the best possible thing to do.  I just know the reality, and that many companies could not afford to do this while also succeeding in their business practices.  End prejudice and bias is more difficult and costly than is possible for any company.  It would have to be a universal effort.

So, in the meantime, I think that blind hires should be only practiced to an extent.  I think that they don't do enough to achieve diversity.  So, I think that there shouldn't be blind hiring in cases where a company is not achieving a morally laudable level of diversity.  I'm not saying to back to looking at pedigrees and personal history.  We know that there is still discrimination, and the evidence shows that having a foreign sounding name or looking a certain ways count against people (wrongly of course, but it's happening).  There have to be more overt steps taken towards diversity.  There have to be stronger steps taken towards giving people that aren't white or male a chance to succeed.  I don't know if I want to use the term "affirmative action", even though a form of that might be what I'm arguing.  I know there are many sorts of baggage that accompany that term.  But really, more active steps need to be taken to achieve diversity.  I also don't want to say we need "quotas" for diversity, but maybe that is what is required!?!  I mean, I really don't see the argument that blind hiring actually would achieve a good proportion of diversity.  So if it means that we do need something like quotas for diversity, maybe that is what needs to be advocated.  In order to reach equality in diversity, and steps taken towards ending bias and discrimination, it might require more stringent efforts in the hiring process.  It shouldn't be about what's on paper, and I know it sounds bad to say it should also be about race and gender.  But really, if the only step towards diversity would require actually seeking out and giving extra emphasis towards those that don't meet historical molds of what an employee should be/look like, maybe that would be what it takes!  UGH, again, my whiteness here should count against me.  I don't know what it would be like for someone who isn't white or male to apply for a job that would have as a requirement the fact that the applicant not be white or not be male.  Maybe that would feel shitty?   I don't know.  But if we want a more diverse employee population, it might require something more drastic than blind hiring.  

4.2 How would you compare blind-hiring to a diversity-first hiring proccess, like affirmative action?

Well, I should have read this question before writing what I did above, for a lot of what I wrote above could be said here.  The comparison is partially described above.  Blind hiring would try to eliminate race as a factor in hiring, but making all applicants look the same on paper.  They try to eliminate bias in the hiring process by making it as impossible as possible to let the hiring committee take into account race or gender.  Whereas affirmative action, in a more general sense (from the historical application of it) specifically tries to take into account race or gender in the hiring process, and even tries to specifically single our those that meet the affirmative action category and give special consideration to those people.  

I compared them above.  There are times where blind hiring is good, as it does increase diversity, and it also might do some good in increasing the chances of a diverse candidate to get a job.  But I don't think it does enough, and it really can't do the best job of accounting for all of the discrimination that exists for diverse populations.  Society is racist and sexist, the problems are pervasive, and a blind hiring cannot fully account for this and eliminate bias.  For the diverse applicant already has already experienced bias even before applying, and how can that not affect their resume?  Heck, even if their resume and history would look word for word identical to that of a white male applicant, that to me would signal that the diverse applicant had to work that much harder to get to where they were and how they were represented on their resume.  They would be a stronger applicant by that measure.  But a blind hiring system wouldn't be able to account for this!

Affirmative action, however, would be able to take societal biases more into account.  It could do more to account for this and work against these pervasive problems.  It does a much better job of bluntly working against general societal discrimination.  However, I would perhaps admit that this is a very blunt tool to handle discrimination, and I know that I've read accounts from people who knew that some of their chances were afforded to them on account of affirmative action, and that some people did not like that fact.  I don't want to say that their negative feelings for getting an opportunity because of affirmative action are invalid or anything.  But I definitely would roll my eyes (internally) when hearing complaints from, say, my students, who would at times bemoan the "discrimination against whites" that resulted from affirmative action.  It's ridiculous, and wrong, for a white person to feel wronged by affirmative action (at least in my opinion/belief).  


This is somewhat aside and separate from the question here, but I am very curious if people in our OCS class feel very differently about this.  Were there answers here that reflected a very different belief?  God forbid, are there people that thought affirmative action as practiced in the US to rectify some of our discriminative practices was wrong or a bad idea?  Are there people whose answers that pretty much, perhaps subtly, suggested a view that racism is over and there is no bias in hiring?  Or that blind hiring is the only way to go?  I hope no one was so strict in their beliefs!  Maybe you instructors did see this?  I hope we actually get to perhaps discuss this in class.  However, I know that's a freaking minefield, and we don't want to ruin what I'd see as an overall positive environment.  I thought that the fact that OCS gave scholarships to women in order to increase the chances of a higher percentage of female students was a good sign that I was applying to a good place.  I also liked some of the mission statements and anti-discrimination language.  So, knowing that others read this before applying or knew of it by the time we started, that I would think our students were an open-minded an ethically conscious group of people.  Who knows, though!  I also know we are here to code and probably not to engage in ethical discussions.  But hey, if we wanted to get into that, it could be valuable? (if it wouldn't be a minefield, that is.  If you knew that some people thought very differently than I do, perhaps it wouldn't be as positive an experience.)
